The Programme for International Student Assessment is an international survey conducted by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) with 15 year old students that measures academic perfomance and records a range of personal and demographic background information. We analysed the Australian subset of the PISA 2012 data to investigate the relationships between students' psychological dispositions, demographics, and mathematical literacy. The dataset is publicly available from the Australian Council for Educational Research (ACER; http://www.acer.edu.au/ozpisa/the-australian-pisa-data-files). Through careful sampling, the dataset has good coverage of all Australian jurisdictions and contains data on more than 14,000 students. We have chosen to follow ACER's choice of psychological dispositions from their Australian Report on the PISA 2012 assessment \cite(Thomson2013): mathematics self-efficacy; mathematics self-concept; mathematics anxiety; instrumental motivation in mathematics; interest in mathematics; subjective norms surrounding mathematics; perceived failure in mathematics; perceived control in mathematics; and perceived control in school. 

\header Dispositions

To be good at mathematics, a student needs to develop an understanding of concepts, become fluent at procedures, be able to reason, and have the ability to strategise these components. These facets are all rightly recognised in various national curricula \cite(Australian curriculum , UK curriculum). However, the successful learning of mathematics depends on more than the acquisition of knowledge and skills; it depends on the development of positive dispositions towards mathematics. By dispositions, we refer to the attitudes and beliefs that a student has in relation to learning mathematics.

There is a wealth of psychology studies that have found self-efficacy and the closely related self-concept to be the strongest correlates among the dispositions of academic achievement and participation, both generally and specific to mathematics \cite(marks2001, richardson2012, schulz2015). Although they are both related to self-evaluation, self-efficacy and self-concept are distinct constructs \cite(Ferla2009). Self-efficacy is the task- or situation-specific belief that an individual has that they can succeed \cite(bandura1997); an example from PISA 2012 is, “How confident do you feel about calculating how many square metres of tiles you need to cover a floor?” In contrast, self-concept is an individual's own judgement of their  achievements, abilities or skills \cite(stankov2014); e.g. “Do you agree with the statement: I learn mathematics quickly?”

Mathematics anxiety has been shown to be a strong negative influence on participation and lifelong learning of mathematics \cite(goetz2013). It can be defined as “feelings of fear, apprehension, or dread that many people experience when they are in situations that require solving math problems” \cite(maloney2014). It has been widely studied in its relationship with gender. However, there is little consensus in the field, with reports variously finding girls or boys being more affected, or no gender effect at all (for a review, see \cite(devine2012; maloneybeilock2012).

Motivational beliefs